Always: the essence of creatures, This then makes them live.Below, it gives birth to the five grains; Above, it acts to arrange the stars.  When it flows in the space between heaven and earthWe call them ghosts and spirits.When it collects in the center of the breast of people,We call them sages.

Thus the Qi of the citizens:  Is it bright?As though ascending to heaven.  Is it dark and quiet?As though entering into an abyss.  Is it wide and spacious?As though residing in the ocean.  Is it closeA?As though residing in oneself.

 Thus this Qi,  Can not be brought to rest by using force, But can be calmed by using De. Can not be summoned by using your voice, But can be made welcome by using your intent.

When you can respectfully* maintain it, and never lose it,This is called developed De. When De develops, and wisdom* arises,The bounty of the ten thousand creatures is attained.

Always: the form of the heart/mind isNaturally full, naturally overflowing,Naturally born, naturally complete. The reason that you lose itIs certainly due to worries and happiness, love and anger, desire for profit.If you can leave behind worries and happiness, love and anger, desire for profit,Your heart/mind then returns [to its original nature] successfully.

The nature of that heart/mindBenefits from calmness and the tranquility that comes from it.Do not be troubled, do not be confused,And harmony is then naturally achieved.

 Is it very bright?As though located right by your side. Is it very easy to overlook?As though it will never be attained. Is it very remote and indistinct?As though utterly without boundaries.

To examine this, you need not go far:You use De daily.

Now: Dao is the reason that the form [of the heart/mind] is full! But people can not be strong enough to keep it, It goes and does not return,It arrives but does not dwell.

  Is it silent?There is no one who can hear its sound.  Is it closeA?It is residing in the heart/mind. Is it very dim and obscure?You can not see its form. Is it very prolific?It gives us all life.

You can not see its form,You can not hear its voice,Yet there is an order to its accomplishments. We call it Dao.

Always: Dao is nowhere to be found,But in a virtuous heart/mind it can calmly dwell.When the heart/mind is still and Qi is regulated,Dao can then stay there.

That Dao is not remote:Citizens attain it by being born.That Dao does not depart:Citizens rely on it for understanding.

Thus: is it closeA? As though it could be tied together with you. Is it very minute and subtle? As though it is utterly nowhere to be found.

The nature of that DaoDetests thoughts and words about it.But when you cultivate your heart/mind and still your thoughts,Dao can then be attained.

 Dao,  That which your mouth can not speak! That which your eyes can not see! That which your ears can not hear!It is the reason that we cultivate the heart/mind and properly align [its]B form!  That which when people lose, thus they die. That which when attained, thus they are born!  That which when duties lose, thus they fail. That which when attained, thus they are completed!

  Always: Dao isWithout root, without stalk,Without leaves, without flowers.By means of it the ten thousand creatures are born,By means of it the ten thousand creatures are made complete.This [natural] order, it is called Dao.

 That which presides over Heaven is proper alignment, That which presides over Earth is equability,That which presides over people is calmness and stillness.

Spring, autumn, winter, summer, The timing of heaven!Mountains, hills, streams, valleys, The limbs of the earth!Love, anger, taking, giving, The schemes of the people!

Thus the sage:  Takes part in the changing of the seasons, but is not transformed;  He attends to creatures, but is not changed by them.

When you can be properly aligned and can be stillC, Then, you can be settled.With a settled heart/mind in your center,Your ears and eyes are acute and clear,Your four limbs are hard and strong, You are able to become a dwelling for essence. This essence,  Is essence of Qi!

With Qi and Dao, then there is life;  With life, then there is contemplation;  With contemplation, then there is understanding; When you reach understanding, then stop!Always: if the form of the heart/mindHas too much understanding, life is lost.

Knowing the OnenessD with creatures can transform them, We call this being spirit-likeE.Knowing the Oneness with your duties can change them, We call this being wise*.

To transform creatures, without altering your Qi; To change duties, without altering your wisdom*; F  Only a noble man* who maintains OnenessGCan do this!

When he maintains OnenessG and does not lose it,He can ruleH the ten thousand creatures.A noble man* uses creatures,He does not allow creatures to useI him.

When he attains the regulation of Oneness: A regulated heart/mind resides in his center, Regulated speech comes from his mouth, Regulated duties are assigned to people.  Then, the world is regulated!

 One wordJ is attained by him, and the world obeys him;  One wordJ settles him, and the world listens to him.We call him fair and just!

 If the form [of the heart/mind] is not properly aligned, De will not arrive. If the center is not still, The heart/mind will not be regulated.

When the properly aligned form takes in De,The kindness* of heaven and the righteousness* of earth  Then naturally arrive, and overwhelmingly.

This highest of spirit-like understandingK, Is it illuminating? You will understand the ten thousand creatures.L

 Maintain the righteousness* of the center, and you will not err: Do not allow creatures to confuse your senses, Do not allow the senses to confuse your heart/mind.This is called attaining the center.

 There exists a spirit[-like understanding] naturally located in the self, One moment it goes, one moment it arrives; There is no one who can contemplate it.Lose it and you will certainly be confused,Attain it and you will certainly be regulated.

Respectfully* empty its dwellingM,And essence will naturally arrive.This essence  consider it and contemplate it,Rather than study ways to regulate it.Keeping a serious appearance, and an attitude of awe and respect*,Essence will arrive and settle.

 When you attain it and never let go of it,Your ears and eyes will be restrained,Your heart/mind will have no other plans.With a properly aligned heart/mind located in the center,The ten thousand creatures attain their proper value.

Dao fills the worldEvery place the citizens are located, But the citizens can not understand this!

With the liberation of one wordJ:Your head can observe what is in heaven,Your lowest extreme is on earth,And your coils fill the nine provinces.N

What does it mean to be liberated by it?You will reside in a calm heart/mind.  I regulate my heart/mind and my senses are then regulated; I calm my heart/mind and my senses are then calm. That which regulates them is the heart/mind! That which calms them is the heart/mind!The heart/mind thus contains a heart/mind;  The center of the heart/mind also has a heart/mind!

In that heart/mind of the heart/mind:Thought thus comes before words; After thought comes form; After form comes words; After words comes manifestation; After manifestation comes regulation.Without regulation, there will certainly be confusion;  Confusion, then death.

Where essence exists, there is naturally life, Outside you, calmness flourishes; It collects inside you, thus acting as a primal spring.Like a vast lakeO, it is harmonious and equable.

It thus becomes a fountainhead of Qi.As long as the fountainhead does not dry up,The four limbs are then strong.

When the spring is not used up,The nine bodily openingsP are then open [to the flow of Qi]. Then you can span the limits of heaven and earth, And cover the four seasQ.

When the center is without doubt or desire,The outside is without demonic disasters.Those whose heart/mind is whole and complete in the center:Their form is whole and complete on the outside,They do not happen to meet heavenly disasters,They do not encounter people who cause harm, We call them sages.

When people can be properly aligned and still:Their hair and skin are abundant and smooth,Their ears and eyes are acute and clear, Their muscles are supple and their bones are strong.

 Then they can support the great circle of heaven,And walk on the great square of earth.They are a reflection of great purity,They see with great clarity.

Respectful* and cautious, they are without error; Each day they renew their De.They understand the whole worldThoroughly out to the four extremes.

They respectfully* develop their fullness; This is called inner attainment.However, if they do not return [to their original nature],This creates errors.

  Always: Dao isCertainly complete, certainly all-pervasive,Certainly magnanimous, certainly relaxed,Certainly hard, certainly strong.

Maintain your virtue and never give up; To pursue excess disperses and weakens it.Once you understand the extremes,Return to Dao and De.

When your whole and complete heart/mind is in the center,It can not be hidden or concealed, It is known in your forms appearance,It is seen in your skins color.

When with virtuous Qi you meet people,They will love you as they would their brothers.When with wicked Qi you meet people,They will harm you with their weapons of war.This is because the sound of that which is un-spokenTravels faster than a clap of thunder.

The form of the heart/minds QiIs brighter than the sun and moon,More observant than a father or mother.  Rewards are not enough to encourage virtue,  Punishments are not enough to discipline excesses. Qis intent is attained, and the world obeys;  The heart/minds intent becomes settled, and the world listens.

Because they consolidateR Qi like spirits,The ten thousand creatures are prepared for existence. Can you consolidateR it? Can you unify it? Can you foretell bad fortune and good fortune, but without divining? Can you then stop? Can you?

 How can you never seek it from anyone, Yet attain it yourself?Contemplate it, contemplate it, and again repeatedly contemplate it. Should you contemplate it yet not comprehend it, Know that ghosts and spirits can comprehend it.  However, it is not comprehended by the power of ghosts and spirits,  But by the utmost of essences Qi!

Once the four limbs are properly aligned,Once blood and Qi are still:Unify your intent, consolidateR your heart/mind; And the ears and eyes will be restrainedEven though what is remote seems near.

Deep contemplation creates understanding; Disdain and laxity creates worries; Cruelty and arrogance creates resentment; Worries and melancholy create sickness.Sickness then causes death.

 If you contemplate these and do not let go of them,Inside you will be distressed, outside you will be weak.Do not neglectS to make plans for this,Or life will leave its dwelling.

 Do not eat as if you were starving, Do not contemplate as if you were indifferent.When you restrain these appropriately and simultaneously,That [Dao]T will naturally arrive.

 Always: at the birth of people, Heaven produces their essence,Earth produces their form;  These combine in order to make people.

 When these are in harmony then there is life; No harmony, no life.Observe the Dao of harmony:Its essence is not seen,Its manifestations are not wicked.When equability and proper alignment completely fill your breast,And the principles of regulation are in your heart/mind,This gives long life.

 When love and anger lose their proper value,Then use this plan of action:Restrain your five desiresU,Leave behind your two misfortunes, Do not love, do not be angry.Then equability and proper alignment will completely fill your breast.

 Always: at the birth of people, They certainly have equability and proper alignment.The reason that they lose it  Is certainly due to love, anger, worries, suffering.

 Thus: there is nothing that stops anger like poetry, There is nothing that removes worries like music, There is nothing that restrains music like propriety,* There is nothing that maintains propriety* like respect*.V

 [But,] there is nothing that maintains respect* like stillness.Inwardly still and outwardly respectful*,You can return to your [original] nature,And your nature will be exceptionally settled.

Always: regarding the Dao of eating,  Over-filling causes injury, and your form will not be right;  Over-fastingW makes your bones wither and your blood congeal.When you reach the space between filling and fastingW,This is called achieving harmony, That which is the dwelling place of essence And that which is the creation of understanding.

 When hunger and satiation lose their proper value,Then use this plan of action:When you are satiated, then move about quickly.When you are hungry, then neglect your contemplation.When you are old, then take charge of your concerns.

If you are satiated and do not move about quickly,  Your Qi will be obstructed in your four extremities.If you are hungry and do not neglect your contemplation,When you eat you will get full but you will not stop.If you are old and do not take charge of your concerns,When you are distressed, then you will be quickly exhausted.

When you expand your heart/mind and free it,When your Qi is magnanimous and vast,  When your form is calm and unchanging: You can maintain OnenessG and reject the ten thousand trivialities,You see profit and are not tempted,You see trouble and are not frightened.You are magnanimous, relaxed, and kind*; When alone, you are happy with your self.This is called cloud-like Qi, Your intent and behavior resemble that of heaven.

 Always: at the birth of people, They certainly have joy.When they are worried, then they lose these tenetsX.When they are angry, then they lose the source.Where there is worry, grief, love, anger,Then Dao does not dwell.

Love and desire: still them.Foolishness and confusion: properly align them.When you do not pull and do not push,YGood fortune will naturally return to you:That Dao will naturally arrive,Which you can rely on and consult with.When you are still, then you attain it,When you are impatient, then you lose it.

This potent Qi in your heart/mind:One moment it arrives, one moment it departs.It is so tiny there is nothing inside it,It is so great there is nothing outside it.

The reason that you lose itIs because impatience causes harm.When the heart/mind can maintain stillness,Dao will naturally settle there.

For people who attain Dao: Regulation supports it and it will not dissipate easily,So that the center in their breast does not fail them.When following the Dao of restraining desire,The ten thousand creatures do not cause harm.